README.md, before:

# Agentic Spec

**Open standard for declarative AI agent systems.**

Define your agents, tools, and multi-agent orchestration in portable YAML. Run them on any compliant runtime.

---

## Why Agentic Spec?

AI agent configurations are fragmented. Every framework has its own format, locking you into a specific runtime. Agentic Spec changes that:

- **Write once** - Declarative YAML schemas for agents, MCP tools, and A2A services
- **Run anywhere** - Portable across any compliant runtime
- **Validate consistently** - Standard tooling for linting and validation
- **Extend safely** - Namespaced extensions for vendor-specific features

Think of it as **infrastructure-as-code for AI agents**.

---

## The Formation Standard

A **Formation** is a complete AI agent system defined in YAML:

```yaml
schema: "1.0.0"
id: my-formation
description: Customer support system

llm:
  models:
    - text: openai/gpt-4o

agents:
  - id: support-agent
    role: Customer Support
    tools: [knowledge-base, ticketing]

mcp:
  - id: knowledge-base
    command: npx @company/kb-server
```

Agents, tools, memory, knowledge, secrets - all declared, all portable.

---

## Projects

| Repository | Description |
|------------|-------------|
| [**formation**](https://github.com/agentic-spec/formation) | Core schemas, specs, and templates |
| *validator* | Schema validation library (coming soon) |
| *linter* | CLI linting tool (coming soon) |
| *vscode* | VS Code extension (coming soon) |

---

## Get Started

```bash
# Clone the formation templates
git clone https://github.com/agentic-spec/formation.git
cp -r formation/formation my-project
cd my-project

# Customize and deploy with any compliant runtime
```

---

## Implementations

- [**MUXI**](https://github.com/muxi-ai/muxi) - Reference implementation

Building a runtime? We'd love to list it. Open an issue or PR.

---

## Contributing

Agentic Spec is developed in the open. We welcome contributions to schemas, specs, tooling, and documentation.

- Read the [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/agentic-spec/formation/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
- Review the [Governance Model](https://github.com/agentic-spec/formation/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md)
- Join the discussion in [Issues](https://github.com/agentic-spec/formation/issues)

---

## License

Apache License 2.0

---

<p align="center">
  <i>Portable agents. Open standard. Community driven.</i>
</p>

Commit message:

Revise README for Agent Formation branding and details
Updated references from 'Agentic Spec' to 'Agent Formation' and changed file format mentions from YAML to AFS. Adjusted repository links and contributing information accordingly.

README.md, after:

# Agent Formation
**Open standard for declarative AI agent systems.**

Define your agents, tools, and multi-agent orchestration in portable AFS files. Run them on any compliant runtime.

---

## Why Agent Formation?

AI agent configurations are fragmented. Every framework has its own format, locking you into a specific runtime. Agent Formation changes that:

- **Write once** - Declarative schemas for agents, MCP tools, and A2A services
- **Run anywhere** - Portable across any compliant runtime
- **Validate consistently** - Standard tooling for linting and validation
- **Extend safely** - Namespaced extensions for vendor-specific features

Think of it as **infrastructure-as-code for AI agents**.

---

## The Formation Standard

A **Formation** is a complete AI agent system defined in AFS (or YAML):

```yaml
schema: "1.0.0"
id: my-formation
description: Customer support system

llm:
  models:
    - text: openai/gpt-4o

agents:
  - id: support-agent
    role: Customer Support
    tools: [knowledge-base, ticketing]

mcp:
  - id: knowledge-base
    command: npx @company/kb-server
```

Agents, tools, memory, knowledge, secrets - all declared, all portable.

> **File Extensions:** Use `.afs` (Agent Formation Standard) or `.yaml` - both are fully supported.

---

## Projects

| Repository | Description |
|------------|-------------|
| [**formation**](https://github.com/agent-formation/spec) | Core schemas, specs, and templates |
| *validator* | Schema validation library (coming soon) |
| *linter* | CLI linting tool (coming soon) |
| *vscode* | VS Code extension (coming soon) |

---

## Get Started

```bash
# Clone the formation templates
git clone https://github.com/agent-formation/spec.git
cp -r spec/formation my-project
cd my-project

# Customize and deploy with any compliant runtime
```

---

## Implementations

- [**MUXI**](https://github.com/muxi-ai/muxi) - Reference implementation

Building a runtime? We'd love to list it. Open an issue or PR.

---

## Contributing

Agent Formation is developed in the open. We welcome contributions to schemas, specs, tooling, and documentation.

- Read the [Contributing Guide](https://github.com/agent-formation/spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
- Review the [Governance Model](https://github.com/agent-formation/spec/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md)
- Join the discussion in [Issues](https://github.com/agent-formation/spec/issues)

---

## License

Apache License 2.0

---

<p align="center">
  <i>Portable agents. Open standard. Community driven.</i>
</p>
